UMIP-12 Add PERL to collateral whitelist (#41)
UMAprotocol/UMIPs: UMIPs/umip-12.md

## Headers
| UMIP-12    |                                                                                                                                          |
|------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| UMIP Title | Add PERL as a collateral currency              |
| Authors    | TJ (tj@perlin.net) |
| Status     | Draft                                                                                                                                    |
| Created    | August 31, 2020                                                                                                                           |

## Summary (2-5 sentences)
This UMIP will add PERL to the supported collateral currencies into the global whitelist contract, allowing the usage of PERL as collateral currency.

## Motivation

> PERL is the utility token of Perlin Network. PERL as collateral is expected to have a variety of uses, including the creation of synthetic commodity tokens on UMA. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PERL is the utility token of Perlin Network. PERL is expected to have a variety of uses, including as collateral for the creation of synthetic commodity tokens on UMA. 
```

Perlin intends to use the PERL token collateral to launch a variety of synthetic assets collateralized by its token.  These assets will be provided to customers of financial products across markets including commodities.  More information on the Perlin products can be found on the website: https://perlinx.finance/

## Technical Specification
To accomplish this upgrade, two changes need to be made:
- The PERL address, 0xeca82185adCE47f39c684352B0439f030f860318, needs to be added to the collateral currency whitelist introduced in UMIP-8. 

> - A final fee of 4000 PERL needs to be added for the PERL in the Store contract.

Reviewer: I would propose 8600 PERL. The plan is to move all final fees to around ~$400 -- this will likely be proposed in the next 24 hours, but it seems likely to go through: https://github.com/UMAprotocol/UMIPs/pull/43.

## Rationale

> The rationale behind this change is that it fits into a larger goal of getting adoption of UMA protocol by allowing Perlin’s token (PERL) to be used as collateral, where Perlin’s projects with partners (including ICC Carbon Council) can leverage on UMA protocol.

Reviewer: "can leverage on UMA protocol"

I think this is a typo -- should probably be "leverage UMA protocol" or "get leverage using UMA protocol".

$UMA-holders should evaluate the ongoing cost and benefit of supporting this asset as collateral and also contemplate removing support of this collateral if liquidity concerns are identified. $UMA-holders should take note of the collateral’s nature as liquidity of the collateral changes, or if added robustness (eg via TWAPs) are necessary to prevent market manipulation.
 
With ETH/WETH as a benchmark, we will be looking at longevity, token supply & demand, volatility & liquidity of PERL.
With sufficient runway raised for 10 years, there is low risk of PERL token becoming valueless in the short term.
Token Supply & Demand: Ethereum currently has extra ~13-14k ETH minted on a daily basis. At a current supply of 112 million ETH, that is about issuance of 2.08% every 180 days.

> PERL has a token unlock every 6 months which will occur 6 more times, which represents an increase of circulating supply by 38.62%, 47.48%,18.48%, 14.48% 5.05%, and 1.74% respectively. This is a circulating supply shock that needs to be considered while using PERL as collateral. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PERL has a token unlock every 6 months which will occur 6 more times, representing an increase of circulating supply by 38.62%, 47.48%,18.48%, 14.48% 5.05%, and 1.74% respectively. This is a circulating supply shock that needs to be considered while using PERL as collateral. 
```

Volatility & Liquidity:
PERL currently has a market cap of ~21mm USD, and daily volume of ~4mm USD, which represents a volume to market cap ratio of 18.33%. 
ETH currently has a market cap of ~44.3 bil USD, and daily volume of ~ 12.21 bil USD, which represents a volume to market cap ratio of 32%.
Given the above data points, we submit that PERL should be an acceptable collateral type for the DVM to continue to operate as intended.

## Appendix

**The following considerations apply to anyone launching an EMP contract using PERL as collateral, in particular when determining the collateral ratio.  **

Comparison of ETH/PERL coefficient of variation (COV)

> By looking at the COV of ETHUSDT and PERLUSDT, PERL has twice the volatility of ETH. For this reason we recommend double the haircut applied for WETH collateral(20%) on PERL as collateral (40%), equivalent to a collateral requirement(liquidation ratio) of at least 1.67.

Reviewer: What do you mean by haircut? Might be simpler just to say that it has twice the volatility, so the CR for the same synthetic should be double (or multiplied by some other multiple). I'm not sure a fixed or prescribed collateral requirement makes sense because the volatility of the synthetic/collateral ratio depends on the volatility of both assets, not just the collateral. For instance, the recommended CR for UMA/PERL would likely be higher than BTC/PERL.

Author: The definition of haircut can be seen here:  the percentage difference between an asset's market value and the amount that can be used as collateral for a loan.

https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/haircut.asp

I think since perl will act as the role of intermediary/final settlement currency, the doubling of haircut is a fair measure for double volatility. As for factoring the volatility of both assets, I think it should be represented in the initial GCR used. (e.g. UMA/PERL should have GCR of 2.5, but BTC/PERL can have GCR of 2 when the team deploys the EMP)

Reviewer: Gotcha. Sounds good -- I think using haircut as a measure makes sense.

After re-reading, I think what you have here makes sense, since you say "at least" 1.67.

As a side note: I don't think it makes sense to depend on the GCR to protect in cases where the volatility is higher. Anyone can withdraw below the GCR. If someone draws down to close to the collateral requirement, and then the volatility of the price feed is such that their collateralization ratio drops below 100% before they can be liquidated (Black Thursday-style price drop + network congestion), there is no longer an incentive to liquidate them, and the other participants of the contract will bear the burden of their debt. It's important to keep the collateralization requirement high enough s.t. this situation is very unlikely.

![COV OF PERLUSDT](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/wqlcjavAT9LJavtFETVPLQjiGWhKZA4Xc41IFDgoohlgE4yqTD006Rqw-XfoBBVf5eN2ww0KRJWk5fAfjFXGsUGKHLFV_w5_vjxahX7pwuRQ9OwO6DLJw3pyNwjeQpLw-M5htOSq)
COV of PERLUSDT
![COV OF PERLUSDT](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/nAeD2NLxGh4tj4kFm_ZT9RacfP-F4Bg0MXhKMUtRvBvBzbZbbftCIw82wMxvaxB6jUuk36VM_ArPn2ifUnnUKrDZfd3mY3DgVGAXKvA-EaW7SCE2dX3oi7DuH2gEoyF9OTVtCbdA)
COV of ETHUSDT

**Estimation of value locked up in the pool**

> To maximise the liquidity of PERL which reduces the volatility, Perlin will be incentivising users to stake their PERL in liquidity pools as well. With the current incentive mechanism, we are estimating about 20-40% of circulating PERLs to be locked up in liquidity pools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maximise the liquidity of PERL and reduce its volatility, Perlin will be incentivising users to stake their PERL in liquidity pools as well. With the current incentive mechanism, we are estimating about 20-40% of circulating PERLs to be locked up in liquidity pools.
```

**Balancer slippage calculation**
With that in mind, we can calculate the slippage and price impacts of any large sale of PERLs.

Assuming there’s 5 million USD worth of PERL, and 5 million USD stablecoins locked up in a 50/50 pools, which have a swap fee of 0.3%
With 40% haircut applied on PERL, an expiry of 600k of synthetic asset represents a possible sell of 1MM usd worth of PERL. In a worst case scenario where all 1 MM USD worth of PERL are being sold, we can calculate the slippage and effective price below.

![COV OF PERLUSDT](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/7yMLiTrvagz5hfeI3zLKkdFa4_LgJh08zTKw4_CnRp_wPg3FozyB2Q4LZWQtrn2827rnmlfhNJ91lCmQfQZ57-fkSzJN9AyR2zih1ka1Fl1iOKPOybwDXCqQPwyYCQ6MqzV9QXzK)

Bi is the Balance of the token being sold to the pool (16,666,667 PERL), wi is the weight of the token being sold to the pool (0.5) and wo is the weight of the token being bought from the pool (0.5). So the linearized slippage formula for this pool would be:

SLi=(1-0.003)(0.5+0.5)(2*83,333,335)*0.5*1,666,667 = 0.1992

Representing an effective price impact of 20%. 

> This is a non-negligible price impact that may trigger cascade liquidation. And if all of the liquidators seek to sell the collaterals (PERL), that may continue the downward spiral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a non-negligible price impact that may trigger cascading liquidations. If all of the liquidators seek to sell the collateral (PERL), that may continue the downward spiral.
```

> Hence it is essential for contract owners to exercise extreme caution during events of supply shock. However, in reality not all extra PERL will be sold. It might be added to the liquidity pools with more stablecoins, which actually improves liquidity and reduces the volatility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence it is essential for contract participants to exercise extreme caution during supply shocks. It's unlikely that all of the newly unlocked PERL will be sold. Some may be added to the liquidity pools with more stablecoins, which actually improves liquidity and reduces the volatility.
```

> There will be an extra 37% PERL on 26th August. The team will closely monitor the price impact in relation to the size of the liquidity pools, and ultimately determine what’s the minimum liquidity in the pools, and the safe ratio of % of PERL used as collateral vs % of PERL in the liquidity pool before we start creating synthetic assets with PERL. We will consistently use a conservative approach as we collect more data for modelling the risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There will be an additional 37% of the PERL supply unlocked on 26th August. The team will closely monitor the price impact in relation to the size of the liquidity pools and ultimately determine the resulting pool liquidity. This will be used to determine the safe ratio of % of PERL used as collateral vs % of PERL in the liquidity pool before launching synthetic assets with PERL. The team will consistently use a conservative approach as they collect more data for modeling the risk.
```
